src/content/posts/making-html-of-jsx-10x-faster.mdx, before:

---
title: "Making html_of_jsx ~10x faster"
publishedAt: "2025-12-03"
description: "A story of how static analysis helped improve performance in html_of_jsx"
isDraft: false
tags:
  - "OCaml"
  - "html_of_jsx"
  - "SSR"
---

Server-side rendering should be as fast as possible. I've been working on this problem for a while now (with [server-reason-react](https://github.com/ml-in-barcelona/server-reason-react) and [html_of_jsx](https://github.com/davesnx/html_of_jsx)) and I have plenty of optimizations to do.

Each time I dig into performance, I arrive at the same insight: the first step is to avoid doing work that can be done earlier (and do it only once).

This post explains how static analysis can eliminate runtime overhead, making `html_of_jsx` between 2x and 12x faster and some assumptions that I thought were clever but turned out to be crap.

## What is html_of_jsx

html_of_jsx is an OCaml/Reason library that lets you write JSX and render it to HTML strings for server-side rendering:

```mlx
let page =
  <html lang="en">
    <head><title>(JSX.string "My Page")</title></head>
    <body>
      <h1>(JSX.string "Hello, World!")</h1>
    </body>
  </html>

let html = JSX.render page
```

*Examples in this post use [mlx](https://github.com/ocaml-mlx/mlx), an OCaml syntax extension that enables JSX.*

It's designed for building server-rendered applications, static sites or even HTML emails.

## The baseline: building trees at runtime

Since HTML is a tree, the naive JSX implementation builds one too.

In the original implementation, the ppx (preprocessor) transforms JSX syntax into function calls that build a tree structure at runtime:

```mlx
(* You write *)
<div id="container">
  <span>(JSX.string "Hello")</span>
</div>

(* ppx transforms to *)
JSX.node "div"
  [ ("id", `String "container") ]
  [ JSX.node "span" [] [ JSX.string "Hello" ] ]
```

The `JSX.node` function creates a `Node` from the type:

```mlx
type element =
  | Null
  | String of string
  | Unsafe of string
  | Node of {
      tag: string;
      attributes: attribute list;
      children: element list
    }
  | List of element list
```

At runtime, the `JSX.render` function walks this tree recursively to generate the HTML.

This works. But consider what happens for a simple static element like `<div id="container" />`:

1. **Allocate** a `Node` record (4 words: 1 header + 3 fields)
2. **Allocate** the attributes list (~14 words: cons cells + tuples + polymorphic variants + strings)
3. **Pattern match** in `render` to identify it's a Node
4. **Pattern match** on each attribute to render it

In OCaml, every heap-allocated value has a 1-word header and each field is another word. A single `<div id="container" />` ends up allocating around **~18 words** (~144 bytes on 64-bit) just to produce a 24-character string:

```html
<div id="container"></div>
```

Looking at a real page like [ocaml.org](https://ocaml.org), it has 590 HTML nodes, almost ~85KB of allocations for static content. There's a lot of room for improvement.

## Rethinking the model

Since the ppx transformation runs at build time, the obvious optimization is to pre-render purely static elements into string literals.

That's a good idea, but real components aren't purely static. They mix fixed HTML with dynamic data:

```mlx
let card ~title ~content =
  <div id="card">
    (JSX.string title)
    <p>(JSX.string content)</p>
  </div>
```

With the tree model, we're forced to allocate records and lists for the `div` and `p` nodes, just to put `title` and `content` in the right place. We need a different perspective.

Instead of seeing it as a tree, we can see it as a **template**:

```
  <div id="card">    ├───── Static
    ┌─────────────────┐
    │   {title}       ├─ Dynamic
    └─────────────────┘
    <p>               ├───── Static
      ┌─────────────────┐
      │   {content}     ├─ Dynamic
      └─────────────────┘
    </p>              ├───── Static
  </div>             ├───── Static
```

## Inspiration

Separating the static structure from the dynamic values is a technique well-explored in other high-performance systems:

- [Million.js](https://github.com/aidenybai/million): Optimizing compiler for React
- [blaze-html](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/blaze-html): Haskell's blazingly fast HTML combinator library
- [Play Framework Twirl Templates](https://www.playframework.com/documentation/2.8.x/ScalaTemplates): Scala's compiled template engine
- [Partial Evaluation and Automatic Program Generation](https://www.itu.dk/people/sestoft/pebook/)

## The strategy

To implement this, I introduced a **static analyzer** step in the preprocessor that walks each JSX element **during the build step** and classifies it:

1. **Analyze attributes**: Are all attribute values literals (`id="container"`) or do some depend on runtime values (`id={className}`)?

2. **Analyze children**: Are children static text, static nested elements, or dynamic expressions?

3. **Decide**: If everything is static, compute the HTML string during compilation and merge static portions together. Otherwise, bailout and generate code that builds the string at runtime.

## Compile-time rendering

For fully static elements, the ppx **runs the rendering at compile time** and emits a string literal:

```mlx
(* You write *)
<div id="container"><span>"Hello"</span></div>

(* ppx transforms to *)
JSX.unsafe "<div id=\"container\"><span>Hello</span></div>"
(* NOTE: `JSX.unsafe` creates a Unsafe variant
         and avoids some HTML escaping logic *)
```

The string `"<div id=\"container\"><span>Hello</span></div>"` is computed during compilation: escaping attributes, building the tag structure, etc. At runtime, it's just a constant string. Zero computation, zero allocation.

For elements with dynamic content, we can't pre-compute the full string, so we generate `Buffer`-based code that assembles the HTML at runtime:

```mlx
(* Has dynamic child - can't fully pre-compute *)
let greet name = <div>(JSX.string name)</div>

(* ppx emits *)
let greet name =
  let buf = Buffer.create 128 in
  Buffer.add_string buf "<div>";
  JSX.write buf (JSX.string name);
  Buffer.add_string buf "</div>";
  JSX.unsafe (Buffer.contents buf)
```

Notice that even here, the static parts (`"<div>"` and `"</div>"`) are pre-computed string literals. Only the dynamic `name` is processed at runtime.

### The results

I benchmarked using OCaml's [Benchmark](https://github.com/Chris00/ocaml-benchmark) library, measuring throughput (renders per second) with multiple iterations to account for variance.

```
Fully static element: <div class="container"></div>

Baseline (JSX.node):     ~8M renders/sec
After:                  ~27M renders/sec   → ~3x faster
```

For deeply nested static elements, the improvement is more dramatic:

```
Nested static: <div><header><h1>Title</h1></header><main>...</main></div>

Baseline (JSX.node):     ~2M renders/sec
After:                  ~27M renders/sec   → ~12x faster
```

The deeper the nesting, the less construction and traversal.

## Small wins that added up

### Eliminating wrapper allocations

Dynamic strings like `<div>(JSX.string name)</div>` were still inefficient. `JSX.string` wraps the value in a `String` variant that eventually gets passed to `JSX.write`, which immediately unwraps it.

I updated the ppx to detect `JSX.string` at compile time and generate a direct call to a new `JSX.escape` function.

```mlx
(* Before: allocate wrapper, pattern match, unwrap *)
JSX.write buf (JSX.string name);

(* After: direct call, no allocation *)
Buffer.add_string buf (JSX.escape name);
```

This simple change made rendering dynamic strings **34% faster** (from ~15.5M to ~20.8M renders/sec).

### Zero-allocation escaping

The naive implementation of `JSX.escape` allocates a buffer and copies every character, which is slow.

Most user-generated content doesn't contain HTML special characters (`<`, `>`, `&`, `"`, `'`).

I implemented a "scan-first" strategy:
1. Scan the string.
2. If no special characters are found, return the original string **(0 allocations)**.
3. Only allocate a buffer if escaping is actually needed.

Allocations are expensive; reading memory is cheap. Scanning the string twice in the rare case is a small price to pay for zero allocations in the common case.

## Detours: ideas that didn't work out

Performance optimization is humbling. Most "obvious" improvements turn out to be slower, equivalent, or only faster in edge cases. There are some approaches I tried that seemed brilliant at the time:

- **Pre-computing exact buffer sizes**: The overhead of calculating the final size exceeded the savings from avoiding reallocation.

- **Eliminating the `element` type entirely**: If everything becomes `JSX.unsafe(string)`, why keep the variant type? Because `JSX.write` still needs to handle unknown elements passed as children, `JSX.null` needs semantic representation, and `JSX.list` requires deferred composition.

- **Inlining `JSX.escape` at every call site**: The compiler already inlines small functions, and the code bloat hurt instruction cache performance.

- **Using `Bytes` instead of `Buffer`**: Manual byte manipulation for "more control". Buffer is already optimized for this exact use case.

- **Avoiding the fast-path check in `JSX.escape`**: at first, the scan-then-escape approach seemed wasteful (two passes). But in the common case (strings that don't need escaping), returning the original pointer is a win.

## Conclusion

After these optimizations, the ppx classifies elements into four tiers:

| Tier | Pattern | Generated code |
|------|---------|---------------|
| **1. Fully Static** | All literals | `JSX.unsafe("...")` |
| **2. Static + String Holes** | `JSX.string(expr)` children | `Buffer` + `JSX.escape` |
| **3. Static + Element Holes** | Component/element children | `Buffer` + `JSX.write` |
| **4. Dynamic Structure** | Dynamic attributes | `JSX.node(...)` |

The improvement scales with how static your content is. Mostly-static pages (landing/emails) see up to 10x gains. Typical mixed pages see 2-4x improvements.

In retrospect, the original implementation was correct, but correctness and efficiency are different goals. Performance often bends correctness (and sometimes maintainability too!).

Once I knew some of the work only needs to happen once, the optimizations became obvious, so again: the fastest code is code that doesn't run at all.

---

*html_of_jsx is open source at [github.com/davesnx/html_of_jsx](https://github.com/davesnx/html_of_jsx). The code described here are available starting from version 0.0.7.*

If you have ideas for more optimizations, I'd love to hear them -> [open an issue](https://github.com/davesnx/html_of_jsx/issues/new)!

*Benchmarks were run on Apple Silicon (M1) with OCaml 5.4.0. Results will vary based on hardware, OCaml version, and content characteristics.*

Commit message:

Update happy path with zero-allocation

src/content/posts/making-html-of-jsx-10x-faster.mdx, after:

---
title: "Making html_of_jsx ~10x faster"
publishedAt: "2025-12-03"
description: "A story of how static analysis helped improve performance in html_of_jsx"
isDraft: false
tags:
  - "OCaml"
  - "html_of_jsx"
  - "SSR"
---

Server-side rendering should be as fast as possible. I've been working on this problem for a while now (with [server-reason-react](https://github.com/ml-in-barcelona/server-reason-react) and [html_of_jsx](https://github.com/davesnx/html_of_jsx)) and I have plenty of optimizations to do.

Each time I dig into performance, I arrive at the same insight: the first step is to avoid doing work that can be done earlier (and do it only once).

This post explains how static analysis can eliminate runtime overhead, making `html_of_jsx` between 2x and 12x faster and some assumptions that I thought were clever but turned out to be crap.

## What is html_of_jsx

html_of_jsx is an OCaml/Reason library that lets you write JSX and render it to HTML strings for server-side rendering:

```mlx
let page =
  <html lang="en">
    <head><title>(JSX.string "My Page")</title></head>
    <body>
      <h1>(JSX.string "Hello, World!")</h1>
    </body>
  </html>

let html = JSX.render page
```

*Examples in this post use [mlx](https://github.com/ocaml-mlx/mlx), an OCaml syntax extension that enables JSX.*

It's designed for building server-rendered applications, static sites or even HTML emails.

## The baseline: building trees at runtime

Since HTML is a tree, the naive JSX implementation builds one too.

In the original implementation, the ppx (preprocessor) transforms JSX syntax into function calls that build a tree structure at runtime:

```mlx
(* You write *)
<div id="container">
  <span>(JSX.string "Hello")</span>
</div>

(* ppx transforms to *)
JSX.node "div"
  [ ("id", `String "container") ]
  [ JSX.node "span" [] [ JSX.string "Hello" ] ]
```

The `JSX.node` function creates a `Node` from the type:

```mlx
type element =
  | Null
  | String of string
  | Unsafe of string
  | Node of {
      tag: string;
      attributes: attribute list;
      children: element list
    }
  | List of element list
```

At runtime, the `JSX.render` function walks this tree recursively to generate the HTML.

This works. But consider what happens for a simple static element like `<div id="container" />`:

1. **Allocate** a `Node` record (4 words: 1 header + 3 fields)
2. **Allocate** the attributes list (~14 words: cons cells + tuples + polymorphic variants + strings)
3. **Pattern match** in `render` to identify it's a Node
4. **Pattern match** on each attribute to render it

In OCaml, every heap-allocated value has a 1-word header and each field is another word. A single `<div id="container" />` ends up allocating around **~18 words** (~144 bytes on 64-bit) just to produce a 24-character string:

```html
<div id="container"></div>
```

Looking at a real page like [ocaml.org](https://ocaml.org), it has 590 HTML nodes, almost ~85KB of allocations for static content. There's a lot of room for improvement.

## Rethinking the model

Since the ppx transformation runs at build time, the obvious optimization is to pre-render purely static elements into string literals.

That's a good idea, but real components aren't purely static. They mix fixed HTML with dynamic data:

```mlx
let card ~title ~content =
  <div id="card">
    (JSX.string title)
    <p>(JSX.string content)</p>
  </div>
```

With the tree model, we're forced to allocate records and lists for the `div` and `p` nodes, just to put `title` and `content` in the right place. We need a different perspective.

Instead of seeing it as a tree, we can see it as a **template**:

```
  <div id="card">    ├───── Static
    ┌─────────────────┐
    │   {title}       ├─ Dynamic
    └─────────────────┘
    <p>               ├───── Static
      ┌─────────────────┐
      │   {content}     ├─ Dynamic
      └─────────────────┘
    </p>              ├───── Static
  </div>             ├───── Static
```

## Inspiration

Separating the static structure from the dynamic values is a technique well-explored in other high-performance systems:

- [Million.js](https://github.com/aidenybai/million): Optimizing compiler for React
- [blaze-html](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/blaze-html): Haskell's blazingly fast HTML combinator library
- [Play Framework Twirl Templates](https://www.playframework.com/documentation/2.8.x/ScalaTemplates): Scala's compiled template engine
- [Partial Evaluation and Automatic Program Generation](https://www.itu.dk/people/sestoft/pebook/)

## The strategy

To implement this, I introduced a **static analyzer** step in the preprocessor that walks each JSX element **during the build step** and classifies it:

1. **Analyze attributes**: Are all attribute values literals (`id="container"`) or do some depend on runtime values (`id={className}`)?

2. **Analyze children**: Are children static text, static nested elements, or dynamic expressions?

3. **Decide**: If everything is static, compute the HTML string during compilation and merge static portions together. Otherwise, bailout and generate code that builds the string at runtime.

## Compile-time rendering

For fully static elements, the ppx **runs the rendering at compile time** and emits a string literal:

```mlx
(* You write *)
<div id="container"><span>"Hello"</span></div>

(* ppx transforms to *)
JSX.unsafe "<div id=\"container\"><span>Hello</span></div>"
(* NOTE: `JSX.unsafe` creates a Unsafe variant
         and avoids some HTML escaping logic *)
```

The string `"<div id=\"container\"><span>Hello</span></div>"` is computed during compilation: escaping attributes, building the tag structure, etc. At runtime, it's just a constant string. Zero computation, zero allocation.

For elements with dynamic content, we can't pre-compute the full string, so we generate `Buffer`-based code that assembles the HTML at runtime:

```mlx
(* Has dynamic child - can't fully pre-compute *)
let greet name = <div>(JSX.string name)</div>

(* ppx emits *)
let greet name =
  let buf = Buffer.create 128 in
  Buffer.add_string buf "<div>";
  JSX.write buf (JSX.string name);
  Buffer.add_string buf "</div>";
  JSX.unsafe (Buffer.contents buf)
```

Notice that even here, the static parts (`"<div>"` and `"</div>"`) are pre-computed string literals. Only the dynamic `name` is processed at runtime.

### The results

I benchmarked using OCaml's [Benchmark](https://github.com/Chris00/ocaml-benchmark) library, measuring throughput (renders per second) with multiple iterations to account for variance.

```
Fully static element: <div class="container"></div>

Baseline (JSX.node):     ~8M renders/sec
After:                  ~27M renders/sec   → ~3x faster
```

For deeply nested static elements, the improvement is more dramatic:

```
Nested static: <div><header><h1>Title</h1></header><main>...</main></div>

Baseline (JSX.node):     ~2M renders/sec
After:                  ~27M renders/sec   → ~12x faster
```

The deeper the nesting, the less construction and traversal.

## Small wins that added up

### Eliminating wrapper allocations

Dynamic strings like `<div>(JSX.string name)</div>` were still inefficient. `JSX.string` wraps the value in a `String` variant that eventually gets passed to `JSX.write`, which immediately unwraps it.

I updated the ppx to detect `JSX.string` at compile time and generate a direct call to a new `JSX.escape` function.

```mlx
(* Before: allocate wrapper, pattern match, unwrap *)
JSX.write buf (JSX.string name);

(* After: direct call, no allocation *)
JSX.escape buf name;
```

This simple change made rendering dynamic strings **34% faster** (from ~15.5M to ~20.8M renders/sec).

### Happy path with zero-allocation escaping

Most user-generated content doesn't contain HTML special characters (`<`, `>`, `&`, `"`, `'`).

I implemented a "scan-first" strategy:
1. Scan the string to find the first character that needs escaping
2. If none found, return the original string untouched **(zero allocations)**
3. If found, start escaping from that position onward, skipping the already-scanned prefix

The common case now allocates nothing. The less common case pays with a pass, but that's probably inevitable.

## Detours: ideas that didn't work out

Performance optimization is humbling. Most "obvious" improvements turn out to be slower, equivalent, or only faster in edge cases. There are some approaches I tried that seemed brilliant at the time:

- **Pre-computing exact buffer sizes**: The overhead of calculating the final size exceeded the savings from avoiding reallocation.

- **Eliminating the `element` type entirely**: If everything becomes `JSX.unsafe(string)`, why keep the variant type? Because `JSX.write` still needs to handle unknown elements passed as children, `JSX.null` needs semantic representation, and `JSX.list` requires deferred composition.

- **Inlining `JSX.escape` at every call site**: The compiler already inlines small functions, and the code bloat hurt instruction cache performance.

- **Using `Bytes` instead of `Buffer`**: Manual byte manipulation for "more control". Buffer is already optimized for this exact use case.

- **Avoiding the fast-path check in `JSX.escape`**: at first, the scan-then-escape approach seemed wasteful (two passes). But in the common case (strings that don't need escaping), returning the original pointer is a win.

## Conclusion

After these optimizations, the ppx classifies elements into four tiers:

| Tier | Pattern | Generated code |
|------|---------|---------------|
| **1. Fully Static** | All literals | `JSX.unsafe("...")` |
| **2. Static + String Holes** | `JSX.string(expr)` children | `Buffer` + `JSX.escape` |
| **3. Static + Element Holes** | Component/element children | `Buffer` + `JSX.write` |
| **4. Dynamic Structure** | Dynamic attributes | `JSX.node(...)` |

The improvement scales with how static your content is. Mostly-static pages (landing/emails) see up to 10x gains. Typical mixed pages see 2-4x improvements.

In retrospect, the original implementation was correct, but correctness and efficiency are different goals. Performance often bends correctness (and sometimes maintainability too!).

Once I knew some of the work only needs to happen once, the optimizations became obvious, so again: the fastest code is code that doesn't run at all.

---

*html_of_jsx is open source at [github.com/davesnx/html_of_jsx](https://github.com/davesnx/html_of_jsx). The code described here are available starting from version 0.0.7.*

If you have ideas for more optimizations, I'd love to hear them -> [open an issue](https://github.com/davesnx/html_of_jsx/issues/new)!

*Benchmarks were run on Apple Silicon (M1) with OCaml 5.4.0. Results will vary based on hardware, OCaml version, and content characteristics.*
